
MY QUESTION TO CHAT GPT:
-----------------------------------------------------
In a typical genealogical software application there are, among others, records for persons and families, with very different types obviously. In my DeadEnds software I use the unconventional approach of simply using the internal trees making up the original Gedcom structures as persons (if rooted at 0 INDI) or families (if rooted at 0 FAM). So there is no specific Person or Family class or struct.  All the information about persons and families is somewhere down in that record tree made up of Nodes so can be found, retrieved, processed, so forth, as needed. But I often wonder whether this is a good idea. For example, one often needs a person's birth date. Well, it's there in the tree in one of the sub-trees, so it is gettable and returnable at any time. But I could always cache that birth date so that doesn't have to happen. In which case I would then create a Person struct specifically that would have a root: Node property, but also have properties for other attributes of the person, brought up out of the tree when the Person is initialized. Have you any thoughts on whether my approach is fine or whether I might wish to add Person and Family structures to store the records in a more conventional form?

CHAT GPT's RESPONSE:
------------------------------------------
Your unconventional approach of using the original GEDCOM tree structure directly as the data representation for persons and families has its merits and trade-offs. Here are my thoughts on the pros and cons of your approach versus introducing more conventional Person and Family structures.
------------------------------------------
Advantages of Your Current Approach
1. Direct Mapping to the Source:
   o By using the original GEDCOM structure directly, you maintain a transparent, lossless representation of the source data.
   o This approach avoids potential data mismatches or omissions during conversion to another structure.
2. Simplicity in Maintenance:
   o Without additional abstraction layers, there’s less boilerplate code to maintain.
   o Any changes to GEDCOM parsing or validation naturally propagate without needing updates to derived classes or structs.
3. Flexibility:
   o The generic tree structure allows for dynamic traversal and processing without being constrained by predefined attributes.
4. Memory Efficiency:
   o You’re not duplicating data into Person or Family structs, which can be advantageous for large datasets.
------------------------------------------
Disadvantages of Your Current Approach
1. Performance Overhead:
   o Frequently retrieving data like a birth date from a tree adds computational cost.
   o Traversal for each operation can be expensive, especially when performed repeatedly.
2. Complexity in Access Patterns:
   o Accessing and working with nested structures like birth dates or parent relationships requires repetitive traversal code.
   o This can increase the chance of errors and make code harder to read and maintain.
3. Inconsistent Interface:
   o Without a well-defined Person or Family structure, higher-level operations may need to know too much about the underlying tree structure, increasing coupling.
4. Challenges in Optimization:
   o Adding caching mechanisms to improve performance without a Person or Family structure could lead to scattered and complex caching logic.
------------------------------------------
Benefits of Introducing Person and Family Structures
1. Improved Readability and Maintenance:
   o Encapsulating data retrieval in a Person or Family struct makes the rest of your code cleaner and more intuitive. For example:
	let birthDate = person.birthDate // Clear and concise
   o Encapsulation hides the details of how data is retrieved, reducing cognitive load.
2. Caching Frequently Accessed Data:
   o By caching derived attributes (like birth date, parents, or children), you minimize redundant traversals.
   o You can implement lazy properties to populate data on demand, reducing memory usage.
3. Adherence to Common Patterns:
   o Adopting Person and Family structures aligns your software with conventional OOP or structured programming approaches, making it easier for others to understand and contribute to your codebase.
4. Data Validation and Integrity:
   o Structures can enforce data constraints and validation logic, ensuring that attributes like birthDate or spouse are consistent and valid.
------------------------------------------
Potential Hybrid Approach
You don’t need to choose one approach exclusively. Here’s a hybrid strategy:
1. Primary Data Source as GEDCOM Trees:
   o Continue using the GEDCOM tree structure as the canonical source of truth.
2. Derived Person and Family Views:
   o Create Person and Family structures as lightweight views or caches of the underlying data:
        struct Person {
            let root: Node
            var birthDate: Date? {
                root.findSubtree(withTag: "BIRT")?.findValue(withTag: "DATE")
            }
            var name: String? {
                root.findValue(withTag: "NAME")
            }
        }
   o This approach allows you to access attributes conveniently while keeping data retrieval logic localized to these structures.
3. Optional Caching for Performance:
   o Use lazy properties in Person and Family to cache commonly accessed attributes, like birth date or children, only when they are first needed.
4. Efficient Conversion:
   o Provide methods to generate Person or Family structures on-demand or convert the entire GEDCOM tree into these structures as needed.
------------------------------------------
Considerations for Your Decision
1. Data Size:
   o For small or moderately sized genealogical databases, performance concerns are less critical. The flexibility of direct tree usage may suffice.
   o For large datasets, caching derived data in structures could significantly improve performance.
2. Usage Patterns:
   o If attributes like birth dates or relationships are accessed repeatedly, caching in Person and Family structures will improve efficiency.
   o If your software primarily processes GEDCOM files in bulk without repeated access to individuals, the current approach may be fine.
3. Code Complexity:
   o Introducing Person and Family structures may initially increase complexity but will make future development and debugging easier.
------------------------------------------
Conclusion
Your current approach is valid and well-suited for preserving the original GEDCOM data structure. However, introducing lightweight Person and Family structures can enhance readability, maintainability, and performance, especially for frequently accessed attributes. A hybrid approach—using GEDCOM trees as the source of truth but providing convenient derived structures for operations—offers a balanced and flexible solution.
